[ZIP-230] v6 transactions, including ZSAs (#687)
zcash/zips: zip-xxxx.rst

::

  ZIP: XXXX
  Title: Version 6 Transaction Format
  Owners: Daira Emma Hopwood <daira@electriccoin.co>
          Jack Grigg <jack@electriccoin.co>
          Sean Bowe <sean@electriccoin.co>
          Kris Nuttycombe <kris@electriccoin.co>

>           Ying Tong Lai <yingtong@electriccoin.co>
>           Deirdre Connolly <deirdre@zfnd.org>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
          Greg Pfeil <greg@electriccoin.co>
          Deirdre Connolly <deirdre@zfnd.org>
  Credits: Ying Tong Lai
```

|``4``                        |``nConsensusBranchId``    |``uint32``                              |Consensus branch ID (nonzero).                                       |
+-----------------------------+--------------------------+----------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
|``4``                        |``lock_time``             |``uint32``                              |Unix-epoch UTC time or block height, encoded as in Bitcoin.          |
+-----------------------------+--------------------------+----------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
|``4``                        |``nExpiryHeight``         |``uint32``                              |A block height in the range {1 .. 499999999} after which             |
|                             |                          |                                        |the transaction will expire, or 0 to disable expiry.                 |
|                             |                          |                                        |[ZIP-203]                                                            |

> +-----------------------------+--------------------------+----------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------+

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+-----------------------------+--------------------------+----------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
|``8``                        |``fee``                   |``int64``                               |The fee to be paid by this transaction.                              |
+-----------------------------+--------------------------+----------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
```

> |``8``                        |``fee``                   |``int64``                               |The fee to be paid by this transaction, in zatoshis.                 |

Reviewer 2: Suggestion: add a `burn_value` field (values treated as burned may eventually be contributed to the sustainability fund) and then add a consensus rule that all transactions are required to fully balance.

+-----------------------------+--------------------------+----------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
|``varies``                   |``tx_out``                |``tx_out``                              |Transparent outputs, encoded as in Bitcoin.                          |
+-----------------------------+--------------------------+----------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **Sapling Transaction Fields**                                                                                                                                        |
+-----------------------------+--------------------------+----------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
|``varies``                   |``nSpendsSapling``        |``compactSize``                         |Number of Sapling Spend descriptions in ``vSpendsSapling``.          |
+-----------------------------+--------------------------+----------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------+

> |``96 * nSpendsSapling``      |``vSpendsSapling``        |``SpendDescriptionV6[nSpendsSapling]``  |A sequence of Sapling Spend descriptions, encoded per                |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|``96 * nSpendsSapling``      |``vSpendsSapling``        |``SpendDescriptionV5[nSpendsSapling]``  |A sequence of Sapling Spend descriptions, encoded per                |
```

|                             |                          |                                        |protocol §7.3 ‘Spend Description Encoding and Consensus’.            |
+-----------------------------+--------------------------+----------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
|``varies``                   |``nOutputsSapling``       |``compactSize``                         |Number of Sapling Output Decriptions in ``vOutputsSapling``.         |
+-----------------------------+--------------------------+----------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------+

> |``756 * nOutputsSapling``    |``vOutputsSapling``       |``OutputDescriptionV6[nOutputsSapling]``|A sequence of Sapling Output descriptions, encoded per               |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|``756 * nOutputsSapling``    |``vOutputsSapling``       |``OutputDescriptionV5[nOutputsSapling]``|A sequence of Sapling Output descriptions, encoded per               |
```

|``580``                      |``encCiphertext``         |``byte[580]``                         |The encrypted contents of the note plaintext.               |
+-----------------------------+--------------------------+--------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
|``80``                       |``outCiphertext``         |``byte[80]``                          |The encrypted contents of the byte string created by        |
|                             |                          |                                      |concatenation of the transmission key with the ephemeral    |
|                             |                          |                                      |secret key.                                                 |
+-----------------------------+--------------------------+--------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------+

The encodings of each of these elements are defined in §7.5 ‘Action Description Encoding
and Consensus’ of the Zcash Protocol Specification [#protocol-actiondesc]_.

Reference implementation
========================

> * https://github.com/zcash/zcash/pull/5202 (in `zcashd`)
> * https://github.com/zcash/librustzcash/pull/375 (in `librustzcash`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TODO
```

::

>   ZIP: XXXX

Author: ZIP number reserved: 240

>   ZIP: XXXX

Author: ```suggestion
  ZIP: 240
```

  Title: Version 6 Transaction Format
  Owners: Daira Emma Hopwood <daira@electriccoin.co>
          Jack Grigg <jack@electriccoin.co>
          Sean Bowe <sean@electriccoin.co>
          Kris Nuttycombe <kris@electriccoin.co>
          Greg Pfeil <greg@electriccoin.co>
          Deirdre Connolly <deirdre@zfnd.org>
  Credits: Ying Tong Lai
  Status: DRAFT
  Category: Consensus
  Created: 2023-04-18
  License: MIT
  Discussions-To: <https://github.com/zcash/zips/issues/686>

Terminology
===========

The key words "MUST" and "MAY" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
RFC 2119. [#RFC2119]_

The character § is used when referring to sections of the Zcash Protocol Specification
[#protocol]_.

Abstract
========

> This proposal defines an update to the Zcash peer-to-peer transaction format to
> include support for data elements required to support Zcash Shielded Assets,
> initially specified to support the Orchard shielded pool [#protocol]_.  The

Reviewer 3: 1. Is the format consensus-critical?
2. Reduce repeated words

```suggestion
This proposal defines a new Zcash consensus transaction format, which includes data that
supports Zcash Shielded Assets on the Orchard shielded pool [#protocol]_.  The
```

> This proposal defines an update to the Zcash peer-to-peer transaction format to
> include support for data elements required to support Zcash Shielded Assets,
> initially implemented to support the Orchard shielded pool [#protocol]_.  The
> new transaction format defines well-bounded regions of the serialized form to
> serve each of the existing pools of funds, and adds and describes a new elements
> containing ZSA-specific elements.

Author: ```suggestion
This proposal defines an update to the Zcash peer-to-peer transaction format to
include support for data elements required to support Zcash Shielded Assets,
initially specified to support the Orchard shielded pool [#protocol]_.  The
new transaction format defines well-bounded regions of the serialized form to
serve each of the existing pools of funds, and adds and describes a new elements
containing ZSA-specific elements.
```

This ZIP also depends upon and defines modifications to the computation of the values
**TxId Digest**, **Signature Digest**, and **Authorizing Data Commitment** defined by ZIP
244 [#zip-0244]_.

Motivation
==========

The new Orchard shielded pool requires serialized data elements that are distinct from

> any previous Zcash transaction. In addition, with the activation of ZIP 244, the
> serialized transaction format will no longer be consensus-critical. It makes sense at this
> point to define a format that can readily accommodate future extension in a systematic
> fashion, where elements required for support for a given pool are kept separate.

Reviewer 3: 1. ZIP-244 has already been activated
2. Reduce redundant wording

```suggestion
any previous Zcash transaction. Since ZIP 244 was activated in NU5, the
v5 and later serialized transaction formats are not consensus-critical. So this ZIP defines
a format that can easily accommodate future extensions, where elements or a given pool
are kept separate.
```

+-----------------------------+--------------------------+----------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
|``4``                        |``nVersionGroupId``       |``uint32``                              |Version group ID (nonzero).                                          |
+-----------------------------+--------------------------+----------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
|``4``                        |``nConsensusBranchId``    |``uint32``                              |Consensus branch ID (nonzero).                                       |
+-----------------------------+--------------------------+----------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
|``4``                        |``lock_time``             |``uint32``                              |Unix-epoch UTC time or block height, encoded as in Bitcoin.          |
+-----------------------------+--------------------------+----------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------+

> |``4``                        |``nExpiryHeight``         |``uint32``                              |A block height in the range {1 .. 499999999} after which             |

Reviewer 3: Do we want to specify coinbase transaction heights here, or is it ok to leave it in the detailed rules?

|                             |                          |                                        |the transaction will expire, or 0 to disable expiry.                 |
|                             |                          |                                        |[ZIP-203]                                                            |
+-----------------------------+--------------------------+----------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------+

> |``8``                        |``fee``                   |``int64``                               |The fee to be paid by this transaction, in zatoshis.                 |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
|``8``                        |``fee``                   |``int64``                               |The non-negative fee to be paid by this transaction, in zatoshis.                 |
```

Reviewer 3: Or are negative values allowed in coinbase transactions?

Reviewer: Teor's comment refers to a brainwave I had during the ZIP sync today, which is that a negative fee in a coinbase transaction could represent the fees collected from other transactions in the block. This would be more regular, because:
* every transaction would balance exactly;
* the sum of `fee` fields in each block would be zero.

> |``8``                        |``fee``                   |``int64``                               |The fee to be paid by this transaction, in zatoshis.                 |

Reviewer 3: Is it worth making this a CompactSize to save 5+ bytes per block?

Reviewer: I have no strong opinion about this, but a possible argument for doing so is that if we increase the range of amounts in order to accommodate ZSA bridges with other coins that have a larger range, then using CompactSizes would help to mitigate the cost of that (when the full range is not actually used, or for ZEC).

+=============================+==========================+======================================+============================================================+
|``32``                       |``cv``                    |``byte[32]``                          |A value commitment to the net value of the output note.     |
+-----------------------------+--------------------------+--------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
|``32``                       |``cmu``                   |``byte[32]``                          |The u-coordinate of the note commitment for the output note.|
+-----------------------------+--------------------------+--------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
|``32``                       |``ephemeralKey``          |``byte[32]``                          |An encoding of an ephemeral Jubjub public key.              |
+-----------------------------+--------------------------+--------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------+

> |``580``                      |``encCiphertext``         |``byte[580]``                         |The encrypted contents of the note plaintext.               |

Reviewer 2: Oops, I'd meant to put this comment into the Orchard section, but I suppose that it could apply to Sapling as well.
